---
layout: post
uuid: 7123a960518c012e8513001fe16c6eb2
date: 2011-04-25 12:07:36
title: "Atheism: A Curious Case of Faith"
---

h2. {{ page.title }}

*Note:* I'm a Christian, so I feel that I must warn you: What follows is completely "irrational":http://uncyclopedia.wikia.com/wiki/Raptor_Jesus, not grounded in "any known branch of science":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dianetics and is quite possibly laden with an egregious dollop of "hypocrisy":http://www.enviralment.ca/wp-content/uploads/2010/01/hypocrisy.jpg.

Atheism[1] is _hands-down_ the most fascinating religion I know of. I'm not an expert on the topic, so I'll just quote Wikipedia:

bq. "In a narrower sense, atheism is specifically the position that there are no deities." -"Wikipedia":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atheism

Fascinating.

I don't know about you, but I find that it takes tremendous faith to believe that something isn't so _because_ it hasn't been proven [[*yet*]].

You might want to read that last sentence again. Yes, I find it quite natural to _not_ take a stance on something for which I have no knowledge (something my "colleagues":http://blog.onlinemetals.com/wp-content/uploads/2008/07/nerds.jpg often "struggle with":http://ravimohan.blogspot.com/2007/04/learning-from-sudoku-solvers.html [2]). I may not know you, dear reader, but that does not mean that you simply do not exist.

I'm not trying to condescend; I'm suggesting that Atheism isn't as "scientific" or "reasonable" as is commonly held [3] -- although "some":http://www.oklahomaatheists.com/ would suggest otherwise (emphasis added):

bq. "Our Mission: To develop a community of individuals and families who value and promote *_critical thinking_*, *_freethought_*, *_reason_*, and a *_scientific_* worldview -- as opposed to the *_acceptance_* of faith and dogma -- and who seek to have a positive effect on the community at large through fellowship, ethical and rational discussion, community service, and education."

I'm often accused of "over analyzing", so I'll let you interpret the implications for _theists_.


h3. But Charles, I _do_ have a formal proof that there are no deities!

I'm all ears.


fn1. Not to be confused with "Apatheism":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apatheism.

fn2. Yep - that was pretty low. Sorry, "Jeffries":http://twitter.com/#!/ronjeffries.

fn3. Which is completely fine - get over it.

fn4. Oh, and one more thing: you might be going to hell. Yes, _literally_.