---
layout: post
uuid: 8ec4b3304e1a012e850c001fe16c6eb2
date: 2010-04-21 22:00:00
title: From Wordpress to Jekyll
comments: true
---

h2. {{ page.title }}

I've finally decided to ditch "Wordpress":http://wordpress.org/ for "Jekyll":http://jekyllrb.com/. I _really_ don't see the point in using a full-fledged blogging platform if you're seasoned developer -- there's just _way_ too much bloat to sift through.


h3. How is this any better?

What do I like about it? Well, it's pretty easy to get started (aside from seting up "Pygments":http://pygments.org/ on Windows)[1], and all of my posts are contained in "textile formatted":http://redcloth.org/textile files -- for example, this "here":https://github.com/cstrahan/cstrahan.github.com/raw/master/_posts/2011-04-20-just-installed-jekyll.textile is the textile file for this very page. Of course, all of my posts are version controlled using "Git":http://git-scm.com/, and my site is "built and hosted on GitHub":http://pages.github.com/#using_jekyll_for_complex_layouts.


h3. Dude, I'm sold!

Sweet! Here are some tips for you "after you've installed Jekyll":https://github.com/mojombo/jekyll/wiki.


h4. Autogenerate New Posts

Make a "rake task":https://github.com/cstrahan/cstrahan.github.com/blob/master/tasks/mkpost.rake to generate new posts, and include a unique identifier. This will be used by Disqus and the


h4. Configure an Atom Feed

Checkout "my atom feed":https://github.com/cstrahan/cstrahan.github.com/raw/master/atom.xml for inspiration. Note the use of <code>post.uuid</code>, which we auto-generated with our rake task.  I use "FeedBurner":http://www.feedburner.com/ to keep track of my following.


h4. Use Disqus

Use "Disqus":http://disqus.com/ for your comments and be sure to use your posts' <code>uuid</code>, just in case your URLs change (the UUID will assosciate your posts with your comments). You can check out my post template "here":https://github.com/cstrahan/cstrahan.github.com/blob/master/_layouts/post.html.

fn1. You'll find a guide "here":http://skim.la/2010/02/14/how-to-run-jekyll-pygmentize-on-windows/ for getting Pygments installed on Windows.